Data preparation

Before we do any analysis, the first step is to ensure that our data is prepared. First, we'll verify the data with a simple check - in this step we'll put our data in a table format and then investigate whether there are any duplicate rows in our customer level data.

In this case study, we'll be working with two different datasets in the following worksheets:
Databel - Aggregate
Databel - Customer. 

First we'll focus on our customer level data before working with aggregate data later in the case study. The aggregate views are based on data in Databel - Customer.

Step 1: Navigate to Databel - Aggregate and convert the range of data ($A$1:$U$6670) into a tabular format.
Rename this table "Aggregate".

Step 2: Navigate to Databel - Aggregate and convert the range of data ($A$1:$U$6670) into a tabular format.
Rename this table "Aggregate".

Step 3: Identify whether there are any duplicate values in the Customers table, there are two approaches that we can use:
- Remove duplicates feature
- Conditional formatting


Calculating churn

It will be extremely useful to have a measure that calculates churn before deep-diving into the analysis. There is a column called Churn Label that indicates "Yes" or "No", but this column isn't the easiest to work with.

We'll convert this column to a binomial column indicating if the customer churned or not. We need to use that to calculate the churn rate.

Step 1: Create a new column "Churned" in our Customers table that uses an IF() to convert the values in Churn Label based on the following criteria:

"Yes" then 1
"No" then O

Step 2: Create a blank PivotTable of the Customers table and place it in a new Worksheet. Rename this worksheet "Customer Pivots".

Step 3: In the PivotTable, display the total count of customers and number of churned customers.
Update the column headers to user-friendly names such as "Total Customers" and "Churned Customers".

Great! Now we can easily identify how many customers have churned, but what if we want to find out what our churn rate is?

Step 4: Next to the PivotTable, create a new calculation with the header "Churn Rate" that divides churned customers by total customers.
Format this as a % to two decimal places.

Investigating churn reasons

The logical next step is to investigate the different reasons why customers churned. Our job is to create a column chart listing the different reasons why customers churn

Step 1: Create a blank PivotTable of the Customers table in the Customer Pivots worksheet.

Step 2: Analyze the total number of churned customers by Churn Reason.
Rename the row header to "Churn Reason" and the column header to "Churned Customers".

Step 3: Order the churn reasons ascending, to the most popular churn reason appears at the bottom .
Show the Churned Customers as a "% of Grand Total".
- To sort a PivotTable, right-click any value and navigate to Sort > More Sort Options.
Sort Ascending (A to Z) by Churned Customers.
- To convert Values in a PivotTable to "% of Grand Total", right-click on a cell > "Value field setting" and navigate the "Show Value As" > % of Grand Total.

Step 4: Visualize the analysis with a 2D Bar Chart and title it "Churn Reasons".
Hide all field buttons on chart and delete the Legend.

Digging deeper into churn categories

Churn Reasons are grouped together in the Churn Category column. It's our job to identify which churn category is accounting for the highest proportion of churn and understand which priority we should tackle first based on the churn reason.

Step 1: Create a blank PivotTable of the Customers table in the Customer Pivots worksheet.

Step 2: Analyze the total number of churned customers as % of grand total by Churn Category and Churn Reason.
Rename the row header to "Churn Reason" and the column header to "Churned Customers".

We can see that category driving the highest % of churn is Competitor.

Step 3: Filter the PivotTable to only include this churn category.

Analyzing demographics

In this phase, we are tasked with analyzing the different demographic fields from the dataset. We'll be using our Excel skills to create a new field to analyze the data with and create our first calculated field in a PivotTable.

Step 1: Navigate to Databel - Aggregate sheet.

Step 2: We'd like to get further insight into the demographic variables relating to age.

Create a new column "Demographics" next to the Group column using a nested IF() formulas that categorizes customers into the following categories: "Under 30", "Senior" and "Other".

We can utilize the metadata sheet for additional information on variables.

Step 3: Create a blank PivotTable of the Aggregate table and place it in a new Worksheet. Rename this worksheet "Churn Analysis".

Step 4: In the PivotTable:
Create a calculated field "Churn Rate %" that divides churned customers by total customers, then add it to the PivotTable.
Format the calculated field as a % to two decimal places.

We'll be able to re-use this calculated field throughout our analysis.

Step 5: Now let's break this out even further and analyze churn by Demographics.
- Drag Demographics to the Rows section.

Age groups

Previously, we found a great insight that senior citizens churn more often. This suggests that it might be a good idea to analyze the customer age in general.
Our job is to create different age bins and make a combo chart visualizing the number of customers per bracket and their respective churn rates.

Step 1: Create a copy of the PivotTable from the previous exercise in the Churn Analysis sheet.
Replace Demographics with Age in Rows and add Total Customers to Values.

Step 2: Create groups for Age with a split of 10

To group rows in a PivotTable, right-click any value and navigate to Group…
The grouping will automatically work out the start and end values, leave these and set a grouping size in the By: section.

Step 3: Create a line and clustered column chart(combo chart) that shows the number of customers and churn rate for every age bracket.

Step 4: Format your chart and make the graph visually appealing.

Unlimited plan

Databel has a hypothesis that people who are not on an unlimited data plan are more likely to churn. Our task is to investigate how the Unlimited Data Plan influences the churn rate.

Step 1: Create a PivotTable in Churn Analysis based on the Aggregate table that analyses the total number of customers who have an unlimited data plan, as well as the churn rate.

It appears that customers who are on an unlimited plan are more likely to churn. To see if it is related to a certain amount of mobile data (GB) being used, we'll proceed to Step 2.

Step 2: Create a new column in Databel - Aggregate called "Grouped Consumption" that classifies the average monthly GB download in the following groups:

Less than 5 GB.
Between 5 and 10 GB.
10 or more GB.

Step 3: Refresh the PivotTable and re-arrange the table to analyze churn rate by Unlimited Data Plan and Grouped Consumption.

Step 4: Create a stacked bar or column chart to visualize Churn Rate by Unlimited Data Plan and broken out by average consumption levels.
Format the chart and make the graph visually appealing.

International calls

The analysis requirement given by Databel includes a request to analyze the relationship between customers' international activity and churn. They are curious about the behavior of customers who call internationally, and if paying for an international plan influences their loyalty.

Step 1: Create a PivotTable in Churn Analysis based on the Aggregate table that displays a matrix of churn rate by State and whether a customer is on an Intl Plan.

Step 2: Remove grand-totals from the PivotTable.

Hint
Click on the PivotTable to make sure the PivotTable Analyze and Design ribbon bar is showing.
Under the Design ribbon click Grand Totals, then Off for Rows and Columns.

Step 3: Apply a Red - Yellow - Green colour scale on the churn rate values within the PivotTable.

Hint
- Highlight all cells that we need to apply conditional formatting on.
- Under Home click on Conditional Formatting, then Color Scales and select the appropriate scale to display high churn rates in red and low churn rates in green.

Contract type

Databel also wants to improve its customer service since there have been some reported issues. Our job is to investigate two important topics related to customers:
- the contract type, and 
- how many months a person is a customer.

Step 1: Create a PivotTable in Churn Analysis based on the Aggregate table that displays churn rate based on the customers account length.
Remove Grand Totals from the PivotTable.

Step 2: Create groups for Account Length (in months) with a split of 12.
Hint
- To group rows in a PivotTable, right-click any value and navigate to Group…
- The grouping will automatically work out the start and end values, leave these and set a grouping size in the By: section.

It seems the churn rate does decrease over time. 

Step 3: Now, investigate how this decrease behaves through the different types of contracts.

Hint
Drag Contract Type to Columns.

Overview - Adding KPIs

Now that we've created a series of visuals and pivot tables, we need to collate this information to provide the best insights possible to address any key concerns around churn.

In this phase, we'll start by preparing our dashboard sheet to display key information such as total customers, number of churned customers and churn rate.

Step 1: Create a new worksheet called "Overview" and remove the gridlines from the sheet.

Step 2: Create the following headers in cells B2, C2 and D2:

- Total Customers
- Churned Customers
- Churn Rate %

Step 3: Under each header input the KPIs from our Customer Analysis that we completed earlier. We can use cell references or manually enter the data in.

Step 4: Apply formatting and styling to the KPIs to make them visually appealing.

Overview - Adding churn reasons

We've added the first key data points in our overview page. Now let's add some context into why our customers are churning with a particular focus on customers who churn as a result of our competitors activities.

Step 1: Add a visualization that shows the breakdown of churn rate based on the reason customers provided
Hint:
- selct a chart type and pick the data from the appropriate sheet.

Step 2: Since competitor gets highlighted a lot in our previous visual, let's focus on this category.

Add a visualization that shows a filtered view of Churn Category based on 'Competitor' with Churn Rate % and Churn Reason visible.

Step 3: Apply formatting and styling to your visuals for consistent branding with your KPIs.

Overview - Adding demographics

Our dashboard is looking great so far! Now let's provide some context into the demographics of our churned customers to help the business understand what customers we need to prioritize our retention efforts.

Step 1:
- Create a visualization of our choice to display the Churn Rate of the Demographic groups. We can use the PivotTable created earlier to achieve this.
- Clean this visual up by removing unnecessary components such as field buttons and apply any style customizations.

Step 2: Add a visualization that shows the breakdown of customers and churn rate based on age ranges.

Overview - Adding consumption

We're almost finished! We now need to add the finishing touches by including our consumption data.

Step 1: Add a visualization that shows the breakdown of churn based on the average amount of data the customer uses.
- Apply formatting and styling to your visuals for consistent branding with your dashboard.

Step 2:
- Create a copy of the table matrix that displays churn rate by state and international plan into the Overview page.
- Update the PivotTable with a filter to only include those on an international plan.
- Sort the PivotTable by highest to lowest churn rate.

Step 3: Apply a value filter that only displays the top 25 states based on the highest churn rate.






